all right let's open your face
instruction manual to page seven
that's okay just watch our face is part
of the body that's much more responsible
for communication than any other
see for yourself there are just four
muscles in the face that have a
utilitarian function
which is chewing and over 20 muscles
only needed to express emotions
most of them are controlled by a single
nerve though and here's where we begin
our journey
the facial nerve is one of many in the
skull called cranial nerves
they send electric signals to different
muscles in the head and the rest of the
body
the facial nerve as its name implies
makes the muscles of the face work
correctly
if it's damaged you may find that part
of your face isn't working properly
for example when you smile only half of
your lips will rise
while the other half will stay lacks the
chewing muscles though
are controlled by another nerve the
trigeminal one
it sends signals to the four muscles
that help you masticate
you know to your food and is also
responsible for feeling in your facial
skin
if there's something wrong with the
trigeminal nerve you might feel as if
you've just been at the dentists
your skin will go numb and you won't be
able to chew properly
as for the muscles themselves you may
think they're only in your jaw but
that's far from true
if you clench your teeth right now and
press your fingers to your temples
go on do it you'll feel your skin moving
that's the temporal muscles and they go
even further down the sides of your head
almost to the back so basically chewing
starts
far beyond the jawline oh by the way
connected to the temporal
is the smallest muscle in the human body
the stapedius
it's less than half an inch in length
and its function is to support the
stapes
a tiny bone in the middle ear that
allows us to transform vibrations into
sounds
the second most important muscle here is
the masseter
it raises your lower jaw and is
responsible for the strength of your
bite when
chewing or masticating only mammals have
the masseter and it's the strongest in
plant-eating animals
you can feel it work if you touch the
back parts of your jawline when
clenching your teeth
it's so strong it'll easily push back
your fingers
now the other two muscles have a name
they don't pay me enough to pronounce
so i'll show it instead unlike the
previous two
you can't feel them so easily with your
fingers but your ability to move your
jaw in any direction
other than just up and down is thanks to
them
they'll help you grind the food into
smaller pieces like a mill does with
grain
all the other muscles are dedicated to
expressing emotions
but they may have other functions too
for example
the ocular muscles move your eyelids and
let you blink
moisturizing your eyes they're also the
fastest muscles in your whole body
a blink of an eye takes just the blink
of an eye or
only a third of a second that's one of
the reasons you don't even notice this
movement most of the time
by the way now that you're thinking
about it you're careful to control your
blinking aren't you
this makes you blink much more often
than you need to just so you know
the nasal and labial muscles let you
move your nose in any direction you like
they're small and divided into upper and
lower muscles
the upper ones lift the sides of your
nose and the upper lip
allowing you to snarl slightly bearing
your teeth in a thread
the lower ones let you move your nose
down this is mostly important for
animals
since our noses aren't nearly so
sensitive as say
a dog's or a cat's but you can pull your
nose down to scratch it
so there's that then there are three
muscles
right beneath your eyebrows that let you
scow and
fro your brow to show how serious you
are the deeper that wrinkle above your
nose bridge
the more solemn the situation you can
raise your eyebrows in surprise
thanks to different muscles all together
they're a little bit above those you use
to scowl
and it probably makes sense these are
different emotions
by the way if you can raise one eyebrow
at a time
you're pretty rare by different accounts
only 20 to 40 percent of people can do
that
and even fewer can raise their left and
right eyebrows separately
if you raise them too high the auricular
muscles will join in and make your ears
move back a bit
but if you're good at control you'll be
able to wiggle your ears separately
and some people can even do that with
one ear at a time
you try that didn't you well if you feel
your scalp moving at the same time
that's exactly how it works like many
other muscles
auriculars are attached to others and
tug them when they move
that's why even your eyebrows may wiggle
along with your ears
two pairs of muscles belong your mouth
one closer to the middle
and one at the corners they pull your
lips all the way up
making you smile and sometimes they do
that without asking your permission
like when you see a cute puppy you can't
help but smile at that can you
the muscles that allow you to frown and
disdain
pulling the corners of your mouth down
are called the depressors
and what a telling name that is and if
you want to purse your lips
you'll have to use different muscles
again finally
there's a pair called mentalis muscles
which you use to pull down the lower lip
separately
ever bitten yourself on your cheek well
that's because your
buccinators have failed to protect you
from that these muscles act together
with the masseter
and are used to chew without biting
yourself as well as to forcefully blow
air through your mouth now you may say
that the tongue is a muscle too
and you won't be wrong but it's not so
simple
the tongue actually consists of eight
different muscles
woven together and the most amazing
thing about it
is that it never gets tired in your
entire life
well unless you're a trumpet player like
me you always
activate different parts of the tongue
and they simply have no time to be tired
but until you think of it you won't
notice one thing your tongue
actually doesn't have a comfortable
relaxed position in your mouth
it's constantly moving and when it's not
you probably press it towards your
palate
well enough tongue wagging let's move on
now the muscles wouldn't be able to work
without blood pumping through them
and your face is no exception blood
vessels both large and small
supply your face with nutrients needed
for it to look and feel healthy
when the blood flow is too weak your
face is first to pale
signaling people around you that you
feel unwell
and vice versa pinky's cheeks are
considered a sign of good health but
there's one more facial reaction that's
the most human thing ever
blushing no other animal can blush
and science is yet to explain why we do
that at all
when stressed out or embarrassed the
blood swooshes
down into your cheek veins and
capillaries making the skin over them
look red
it's believed to be a purely social
thing showing others that you actually
feel
remorse on a deeper level there's one
more thing only humans have
and that's the chin all other animals
have the mandible going straight back
toward their necks
where humans have a distinct bone
protrusion under their teeth
the purpose of this appendage is also
pretty much unknown
and finally the mirror of the soul your
eyes
you can move them faster than almost any
other part of your body
except maybe the eyelids but if you ever
wondered why you can't look in two
different directions at once
well that's because your brain doesn't
allow it it evolved in such a way to
help you focus on
one thing at a time and in fact you can
move your eyes two different ways at the
same time
check it out hold out your arm in front
of you and
raise one finger look at it and don't
shift your gaze
now slowly bring the finger closer to
your face
until you all but touch the tip of your
nose
if you follow the finger with your eyes
they'd be crushed
right now looking yup in different
directions
the magic of anatomy